h1. Grammatical Evolution Ruby Exploratory Toolkit (GERET)

Copyright (c) 2009 Pavel Suchmann, please see the LICENSE file.

GERET is the toolkit & library designed to explore the potential of the Grammatical Evolution.

Grammatical Evolution is a system which can be used to automatically generate programs or solutions in any language.
Please see the inventors' pages:
* "Michael O'Neill":http://www.grammatical-evolution.org/ 
* "Conor Ryan, University of Limerick, Ireland":http://grammaticalevolution.org/

or read the general introduction:
* "Wiki on GE":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grammatical_evolution 

or purchase the book written by GE creators: 
* "Grammatical Evolution: Evolutionary Automatic Programming in an Arbitrary Language":http://www.springer.com/computer/artificial/book/978-1-4020-7444-8 


h2. Other implementations of GE

* "libGE":http://bds.ul.ie/libGE/ : C++
* "GEVA":http://ncra.ucd.ie/Site/GEVA.html  : Java
* "DRP":http://rubyforge.org/projects/drp/ : Ruby
* ... see the "list":http://www.grammatical-evolution.org/software.html

h2. Features

* multiple objectives optimisation
* human-readable yaml-based configuration
* "ABNF":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augmented_Backus%E2%80%93Naur_Form conformance 
* various GE mappers (bucket rule, positional independence, several node expansion strategies, wrapping...)
* various genetic operators (ripple & LHS crossover, nodal/structural mutations)
* various search algorithms (easily extensible by new ones)
* simple & efficient interface to the domain-specific task


h2. Requirements

The library itself is written in pure Ruby (version 1.8 works but 1.9 is substantially faster), no gem dependencies needed.
However, samples require various software (tcc compiler, Java VM, GHDL simulator). 

Please read a particular sample/*/README before running the sample.


h2. Installation

There are no special installation steps at this moment. Please clone the git repo and play around. 
(To be changed in the future.)

<pre>
cd GERET
test/ts_all.rb                # check the library
test/integration.rb           # check tools & sample runs -- (slow!)
</pre>

h2. Play Now

Run:

<pre>
tools/evolve.rb sample/task/algorithm.yaml
</pre>

for evolution of a _task_ sample using a search _algorithm_.

<pre>
ls sample/               # shows all existing sample tasks.
ls sample/task/*.yaml    # lists all algorithms available for the specific _task_.
ls sample/*/*.yaml       # gives all possible task/algorithm combinations.
</pre>

Interrupt the run by ^C. Repeated evolve.rb invocation loads _algorithm_.store and continues evolving.
Remove _algorithm.store_ if you want to start population(s) from scratch.
Tune _algorithm_.yaml files to see some experiments failing. :-)

For example:
tools/evolve.rb sample/santa_fe_ant_trail/generational.yaml

h2. More Advanced Games

Try various tools/*
For instance:

<pre>
# generate the genotype:
tools/sensible_init.rb sample/santa_fe_ant_trail/generational.yaml > genotype.txt

# see the genotype:
cat genotype.txt

# see the phenotype:
tools/gpmap.rb sample/santa_fe_ant_trail/generational.yaml < genotype.txt
</pre>

See algorithm/* for various search algorithms.

Look at lib/* for reusable classes.

Generate the class documentation:

<pre>
cd lib/
rdoc
your-favourite-browser doc/index.html &
</pre>

Hack your own grammar.abnf files.
Try to write your own pipe.rb tasks (or pipe.py, pipe.java, /usr/local/bin/pipe... ) 
...

h2. No expectations, please

GERET is the _exploratory_ software. 
The functionality of the package or the stability of interfaces is not guaranteed at this stage of development.

If you have an interesting idea for GERET usage give me know: pavel.suchmann at gmail.com



